
1. Use of the Simple Present
1.1. repeated actions
My friend often draws nice posters.

1.2. things in general
The sun rises in the east.

1.3. fixed arrangements, scheduled events
The plane flies to London every Monday.

1.4. sequence of actions in the present
First I get up, then I have breakfast.

1.5. instructions
Open your books at page 34.

1.6. with special verbs
I understand English.

2. Signal words
every day
often
always
sometimes
never
3. Form
infinitive (3rd person singular he, she, it: infinitive + -s)

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Simple Present
Long forms	Contracted forms
I read books.	not possible
You read books.
He reads books.
4.2. Negative sentences in the Simple Present
You must not negate a full verb in English. Always use the auxiliary do for negations and the infinitive of the verb.

Long forms	Contracted forms
I do not clean the room.	I don't clean the room.
You do not clean the room.	You don't clean the room.
He does not clean the room.	He doesn't clean the room.
4.3. Questions in the Simple Present
You need the auxiliary do/does and the infinitive of the verb.

Long forms	Contracted forms
Do I play football?	not possible
Do you play football?
Does he play football?

1. Use of the Present Progressive
1.1. actions happening at the moment of speaking
Peter is reading a book now.

1.2. fixed plans in the near future
We are going to Basel on Saturday.

1.3. temporary actions
I am working in Rome this month.

1.4. actions happening around the moment of speaking (longer actions)
My friend is preparing for his exams.

1.5. trends
More and more people are using their computers to listen to music.

1.6. repeated actions which are irritating to the speaker (with always, constantly, forever)
Andrew is always coming late.

2. Signal words
now
at the moment
Look!
Listen!
3. Form
to be (am, are, is) + Infinitiv + -ing

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Present Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I am playing football.	I'm playing football.
You are playing football.	You're playing football.
He is playing football.	He's playing football.
4.2. Negative sentences in the Present Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I am not playing football.	I'm not playing football.
You are not playing football.	You're not playing football.
You aren't playing football.
He is not playing football.	He's not playing football.
He isn't playing football.
4.3. Questions in the Present Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
Am I playing football?	not possible
Are you playing football?
Is he playing football?


1. Use of the Simple Past
1.1. actions finished in the past
I visited Berlin last week.

1.2. series of completed actions in the past
First I got up, then I had breakfast.

1.3. together with the Past Progressive/Continuous
The Simple Past interrupted an action which was in progress in the past.
They were playing cards, when the telephone rang.

1st action ? Past Progressive ? were playing
2nd action ? Simple Past ? rang

2. Signal words
yesterday
last week
a month ago
in 2010
3. Form
regular verbs ? infinitive + ed
irregular verbs ? 2nd column of the table of the irregular verbs

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Simple Past  regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I cleaned my room.	not possible
You cleaned your room.
He cleaned his room.
4.2. Affirmative sentences in the Simple Past  irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I went home.	not possible
You went home.
He went home.
4.3. Negative sentences in the Simple Past
Do not negate a main verb in English. Always use the auxiliary did (Simple Past of to do) and the infinitive of the verb for negations.

There is no difference between regular and irregular verbs in negative sentences.

Long forms	Contracted forms
I did not clean the room.	I didn't clean the room.
You did not clean the room.	You didn't clean the room.
He did not clean the room.	He didn't clean the room.
4.4. Questions in the Simple Past
You need the auxiliary did and the infinitive of the verb.

Long forms	Contracted forms
Did I play football?	not possible
Did you play football?
Did he play football?


1. Use of the Past Progressive
1.1. actions were in progress at a special time in the past
Peter was reading a book yesterday evening.

1.2. two actions were happening at the same time (the actions do not influence each other)
Anne was writing a letter while Steve was reading the New York Times.

1.3. together with Simple Past
While we were sitting at the breakfast table, the telephone rang.

1.4. repeated actions irritating the speaker (with always, constantly, forever)
Andrew was always coming late.

2. Signal words
while

3. Form
to be (was, were) + infinitive + -ing

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Past Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I was playing football.	not possible
You were playing football.
He was playing football.
4.2. Negative sentences in the Past Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I was not playing football.	I wasn't playing football.
You were not playing football.	You weren't playing football.
He was not playing football.	He wasn't playing football.
4.3. Questions in the Past Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
Was I playing football?	not possible
Were you playing football?
Was he playing football?


1. Use of the Present Perfect
1.1. result of actions in the past is important in the present  It is not important when the actions happened.
I have cleaned my room.

1.2. recently completed actions
He has just played handball.

1.3. states beginning in the past and still continuing
We have lived in Canada since 1986.

1.4. together with lately, recently, yet
I have been to London recently.

2. Signal words
just
yet
never
already
ever
so far
up to now
recently
since
for
3. Form
have/has + past participle *

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Present Perfect  regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have cleaned my room.	I've cleaned my room.
You have cleaned your room.	You've cleaned your room.
He has cleaned his room.	He's cleaned his room.
4.2. Affirmative sentences in the Present Perfect  irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have gone home.	I've gone home.
You have gone home.	You've gone home.
He has gone home.	He's gone home.
4.3. Negative sentences in the Present Perfect  regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have not cleaned my room.	I've not cleaned my room.
I haven't cleaned my room.
You have not cleaned your room.	You've not cleaned your room.
You haven't cleaned your room.
He has not cleaned his room.	He's not cleaned his room.
He hasn't cleaned my room.
4.4. Negative sentences in the Present Perfect  irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have not gone home.	I've not gone home.
I haven't gone home.
You have not gone home.	You've not gone home.
You haven't gone home.
He has not gone home.	He's not gone home.
He hasn't gone home.
* past participle:

regular verbs ? infinitive + -ed
irregular verbs ? 3rd column of the table of the irregular verbs



1. Use of the Present Perfect Progressive
1.1. actions beginning in the past and still continuing (focus is on the action)  mostly with since (point of time) or for (period of time)
I have been waiting for you for three hours. (It was too long.)

1.2. recently completed actions (focus is on the action)
She has been watching too many videos. (It took too much time.)

2. Signal words
all day
the whole day
since
for
Questions with how long
3. Form
have/has + been + infinitive + -ing

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Present Perfect Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have been playing handball.	I've been playing handball.
You have been playing handball.	You've been playing handball.
He has been playing handball.	He's been playing handball.
4.2. Negative sentences in the Present Perfect Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
I have not been playing handball.	I've not been playing handball.
I haven't been playing handball.
You have not been playing handball.	You've not been playing handball.
You haven't been playing handball.
He has not been playing handball.	He's not been playing handball.
He hasn't been playing handball.
4.3. Questions in the Present Perfect Progressive
Long forms	Contracted forms
Have I been playing handball?	not possible
Have you been playing handball?
Has he been playing handball?


1. Use of the Past Perfect
1.1. together with the Simple Past
Mary had read the book before she watched a film.

1.2. the past equivalent of the Present Perfect
He had played hockey.

2. Signal words
no unambiguous ones

3. Form
had + past participle *

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the Past Perfect  regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I had played handball.	I'd played handball.
You had played handball.	You'd played handball.
He had played handball.	He'd played handball.
4.2. Affirmative sentences in the Past Perfect  irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I had ridden the bike.	I'd ridden the bike.
You had ridden the bike.	You'd ridden the bike.
He had ridden the bike.	He'd ridden the bike..
4.3. Negative sentences in the Past Perfect  regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I had not played handball.	I'd not played handball.
I hadn't played handball.
You had not played handball.	You'd not played handball.
You hadn't played handball.
He had not played handball.	He'd not played handball.
He hadn't played handball.
4.4. Negative sentences in the Past Perfect  irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
I had not ridden the bike.	I'd not ridden the bike.
I hadn't ridden the bike.
You had not ridden the bike.You'd not ridden the bike.
You hadn't ridden the bike
He had not ridden the bike.	He'd not ridden the bike..
He hadn't ridden the bike
4.5. Questions in the Past Perfect regular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
Had I played handball?	There are no contracted forms.
Had you played handball?
Had he played handball?
4.6. Questions in the Past Perfect irregular verbs
Long forms	Contracted forms
Had I ridden the bike?	There are no contracted forms.
Had you ridden the bike?
Had he ridden the bike?
5. Be careful!
Past Perfect	Simple Past
The match had started	when he arrived.
Simple Past	Simple Past
The match started	when he arrived.
* past participle:

regular verbs ? infinitive + -ed
irregular verbs ? 3rd column of the table of the irregular verbs


1. Use of the Past Perfect Progressive
how long something had been happening before something else happened

2. Form
had + been + infinitive + ing

3. Example
I had been waiting for Susan for 2 hours when she arrived.


1. Use of the will-future
1.1. future actions happen without the speaker's intention
The sun will shine tomorrow.

1.2. predictions, assumptions
I think Sue will arrive in Paris at 6 pm.

1.3. spontaneous actions
Hang on! I'll have a word with you.

2. Signal words
no unambiguous ones

3. Form
will + infinitive

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the will-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
I will win the match.	I'll win the match.
You will win the match.	You'll win the match.
He will win the match.	He'll win the match.
4.2. Negative sentences in the will-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
I will not win the match.	I'll not win the match.
I won't win the match.
You will not win the match..	You'll not win the match.
You won't win the match.
He will not win the match.	He'll not win the match.
He won't win the match.
4.3. Questions in the will-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
Will I win the match?	not possible
Will you win the match?
Will he win the match?


1. Use of the going to-future
1.1. planned actions in the future
We are going to sing at the party.

1.2. You are certain that sth. is going to happen in the future (logical consequence).
Look at that car! It is going to crash into the yellow one.

2. Signal words
no unambiguous ones

3. Form
to be (am, are, is) + going to + infinitive

4. Examples
4.1. Affirmative sentences in the going to-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
I am going to play handball.	I'm going to play handball.
You are going to play handball.	You're going to play handball.
4.2. Negative sentences in the going to-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
I am not going to play handball.	I'm not going to play handball.
You are not going to play handball.	You're not going to play handball.
You aren't going to play handball.
4.3. Questions in the going to-future
Long forms	Contracted forms
Am I going to play handball?	not possible
Are you going to play handball?


1. Use of the Future Progressive
1.1. An action will be in progress at a certain time in the future. This action has begun before the certain time.

1.2. Something happens because it normally happens.

2. Form
will + be + infinitive + ing

3. Examples
3.1. When I come to school, the other kids will be waiting for me.

3.2. We'll be going to the disco on Saturday.


1. Use of the Future Perfect
sth. will already have happened before a certain time in the future

2. Form
will + have + past participle

3. Example
I will have written the letter by tomorrow.



1. Use of the Future Perfect Progressive
sth. that will have already begun and will be continuing in the future

2. Form
will + have + been + infinitive + ing

3. Example
I will have been swimming for an hour by 6.30.


1. Use of the Conditional Simple
We use it for something that might happen.

We use it in the main clause in type II of the Conditional sentences.

2. Form
would + infinitive

3. Example
I would fly to Sydney if I had the money.



1. Use of the Conditional Perfect
We use it for something that might have happened in the past.

We use it in the main clause in type III of the if clauses.

2. Form
would + have + past participle

past participle ? (infinitive + -ed) or (3rd column of the table of the irregular verbs)

3. Example
I would have phoned you if you hadn't switched your mobile off.




Nouns
A noun is the word that refers to a person, thing or abstract idea. A noun can tell you who
or what.
There are several different types of noun:- ? There are common nouns such as dog, car, chair etc. ? Nouns that refer to things which can be counted (can be singular or plural) are
countable nouns. ? Nouns that refer to some groups of countable nouns, substances, feelings and
types of activity (can only be singular) are uncountable nouns. ? Nouns that refer to a group of people or things are collective nouns. ? Nouns that refer to people, organizations or places are proper nouns, only proper
nouns are capitalized. ? Nouns that are made up of two or more words are called compound nouns. ? Nouns that are formed from a verb by adding -ing are called gerunds


Verb
The verb is perhaps the most important part of the sentence. A verb or compound verb
asserts something about the subject of the sentence and express actions, events, or states
of being. The verb or compound verb is the critical element of the predicate of a sentence.
In each of the following sentences, the verb or compound verb is highlighted:
Transitive Verbs followed by Adverbs
back up: support I will back up your story.
bail out: rescue If you run into difficulties, who will bail you out?
break in: make something new fit
for use I broke in my new hiking boots.
breathe in: inhale We breathed in the fresh air.
breathe out: exhale I breathed out a sigh of relief.
Easy Pace Learning Grammar
Easypacelearning.com
bring back: return She brought back her library books.
bring around: persuade We gradually brought her around to our point of
view.
bring up: raise Bringing up children is never easy.
butter up: flatter We buttered him up, hoping that he would agree to
our proposal.
call in: ask to assist I think it is time we called in an expert.
call off: cancel We called off the meeting.
call up: telephone Why don't you call him up?
cheer on: cheer, encourage I will be there to cheer you on. chop down: fell They chopped down the dead tree.
clean up: tidy The mayor asked everyone to help clean up the city
streets.
fend off: repel The goalie fended off every attack.
ferret out: find with difficulty We managed to ferret out the information.
figure out: solve, understand I can't figure out what happened.
fill in: complete Please fill in this form.
fill out: complete I filled out the form.
fill up: make full We filled up the glasses with water.
give back: return I gave back the bicycle I had borrowed.
give off: send out Skunk cabbage gives off an unpleasant odor.
hand down: give to someone
younger
The tradition was handed down from father to son.
hand in: give to person in
authority
The students handed their assignments in to the
teacher.
hand on: give to another person I am not sorry to hand the responsibility on to you.
hand over: transfer We had to hand the evidence over to the police.
hang up: break a telephone
connection After receiving a busy signal, I hung up the phone.
hold back: restrain, delay He is so enthusiastic; it is hard to hold him back. iron out: remove I am sure we can iron out every difficulty.
knock out: make unconscious Boxers are often knocked out. lap up: accept eagerly The public lapped up the story.
lay off: put out of work The company laid off seventy workers.
leave behind: leave, not bring I accidentally left my umbrella behind. leave out: omit Tell me what happened. Don't leave anything out!
let down: disappoint We will let him down if we don't arrive on time.
live down: live so that past faults
are forgotten This will be hard to live down!
look up: find (information) We looked up the word in a dictionary.
make up: invent She likes to make up stories.
pass up: not take advantage I couldn't pass up such an opportunity.
pension off: dismiss with a
pension He was pensioned off at the age of sixty.
phase in: introduce gradually The new program will be phased in over the next six
months.
phase out: cease gradually The practice will gradually be phased out. pick up: collect You
Easy Pace Learning Grammar
Easypacelearning.com
take over: assume control They will take over at the beginning of June.
talk over: discuss Let us talk it over before we decide.
tear up: destroy by tearing She tore up the letter.
think over: consider I need some time to think it over. think up: invent What will they think up next?
track down: search for and find We finally tracked him down at the bookstore.
trade in: give as part payment Why don't you trade in your old vacuum cleaner for
a new one?
try on: test clothes by putting them
on
I tried on the new suit, but it didn't fit me.
try out: test by using Would you like to try out my fountain pen?
turn away: refuse admission The event was so popular that many people had to be
turned away.
turn back: reverse direction Every fall the clocks must be turned back by one
hour.
turn off: deactivate by using a
switch I turned off the radio.
turn on: activate by using a switch Please turn on the light.
water down: dilute The soup has been watered down. wear out: gradually destroy by
wearing or using
My jacket is wearing out, although it is only a year
old.
write down: make a note I wrote down the instructions.
write off: cancel, regard as They were forced to write off several irretrievable
debts.
write up: compose in writing I used my notes to write up the report.
Adjectives
Adjectives describe or give information about nouns.
The good news is that the form of adjectives does not change; it does not matter if the
noun being modified is male or female, singular or plural, subject or object.
Some adjectives give us factual information about the noun - age, size colour etc (fact
adjectives - can't be argued with). Some adjectives show what somebody thinks about
something or somebody - nice, horrid, beautiful etc (opinion adjectives - not everyone
may agree).

Preposition
A preposition links nouns, pronouns and phrases to other words in a sentence. The word
or phrase that the preposition introduces is called the object of the preposition.
A preposition usually indicates the temporal, spatial or logical relationship of its object to
the rest of the sentence as in the following examples:
The book is on the table.
The book is beneath the table.
The book is leaning against the table.
The book is beside the table.
She held the book over the table.
She read the book during class.
In each of the preceding sentences, a preposition locates the noun "book" in space or in
time. A prepositional phrase is made up of the preposition, its object and any associated
adjectives or adverbs. A prepositional phrase can function as a noun, an adjective, or an
adverb. The most common prepositions are "about," "above," "across," "after," "against,"
"along," "among," "around," "at," "before," "behind," "below," "beneath," "beside,"
"between," "beyond," "but," "by," "despite," "down," "during," "except," "for," "from,"
"in," "inside," "into," "like," "near," "of," "off," "on," "onto," "out," "outside," "over,"
"past," "since," "through," "throughout," "till," "to," "toward," "under," "underneath,"
"until," "up," "upon," "with," "within," and "without."
Each of the highlighted words in the following sentences is a preposition:
The children climbed the mountain without fear.
In this sentence, the preposition "without" introduces the noun "fear." The prepositional
phrase "without fear" functions as an adverb describing how the children climbed.
There was rejoicing throughout the land when the government was defeated.
Here, the preposition "throughout" introduces the noun phrase "the land." The
prepositional phrase acts as an adverb describing the location of the rejoicing.
The spider crawled slowly along the banister.
The preposition "along" introduces the noun phrase "the banister" and the prepositional
phrase "along the banister" acts as an adverb, describing where the spider crawled.
The dog is hiding under the porch because it knows it will be punished for
chewing up a new pair of shoes.
Here the preposition "under" introduces the prepositional phrase "under the porch,"
which acts as an adverb modifying the compound verb "is hiding."
The screenwriter searched for the manuscript he was certain was somewhere in
his office.
Similarly in this sentence, the preposition "in" introduces a prepositional phrase "in his
office," which acts as an adverb describing the location of the missing papers.
Conjunction
You can use a conjunction to link words, phrases, and clauses, as in the following
example:
I ate the pizza and the pasta.
Call the movers when you are ready.
Coordinating Conjunctions
You use a coordinating conjunction ("and," "but," "or," "nor," "for," "so," or "yet") to
join individual words, phrases, and independent clauses. Note that you can also use the
conjunctions "but" and "for" as prepositions. In the following sentences, each of the highlighted words is a coordinating conjunction:
Lilacs and violets are usually purple.
In this example, the coordinating conjunction "and" links two nouns. This movie is particularly interesting to feminist film theorists, for the screenplay
was written by Mae West.
In this example, the coordinating conjunction "for" is used to link two independent
clauses.
Daniel's uncle claimed that he spent most of his youth dancing on rooftops and
swallowing goldfish.
Here the coordinating conjunction "and" links two participle phrases ("dancing on
rooftops" and "swallowing goldfish") which act as adverbs describing the verb "spends."
Subordinating Conjunctions
A subordinating conjunction introduces a dependent clause and indicates the nature of
the relationship among the independent clause(s) and the dependent clause(s).
The most common subordinating conjunctions are "after," "although," "as," "because,"
"before," "how," "if," "once," "since," "than," "that," "though," "till," "until," "when,"
"where," "whether," and "while."
Each of the highlighted words in the following sentences is a subordinating conjunction:
After she had learned to drive, Alice felt more independent.
The subordinating conjunction "after" introduces the dependent clause "After she had
learned to drive."
If the paperwork arrives on time, your cheque will be mailed on Tuesday.
Similarly, the subordinating conjunction "if" introduces the dependent clause "If the
paperwork arrives on time."
Gerald had to begin his thesis over again when his computer crashed.
The subordinating conjunction "when" introduces the dependent clause "when his
computer crashed."
Midwifery advocates argue that home births are safer because the mother and
baby are exposed to fewer people and fewer germs.
In this sentence, the dependent clause "because the mother and baby are exposed to fewer
people and fewer germs" is introduced by the subordinating conjunction "because."
Correlative Conjunctions
Correlative conjunctions always appear in pairs -- you use them to link equivalent
sentence elements. The most common correlative conjunctions are "both...and,"
"either...or," "neither...nor,", "not only...but also," "so...as," and "whether...or."
(Technically correlative conjunctions consist simply of a coordinating conjunction linked
to an adjective or adverb.)
The highlighted words in the following sentences are correlative conjunctions:
Both my grandfather and my father worked in the steel plant.
In this sentence, the correlative conjunction "both...and" is used to link the two noun
phrases that act as the compound subject of the sentence: "my grandfather" and "my
father".
Bring either a Jello salad or a potato scallop.
Here the correlative conjunction "either...or" links two noun phrases: "a Jello salad" and
"a potato scallop."
Corinne is trying to decide whether to go to medical school or to go to law
school.
Similarly, the correlative conjunction "whether ... or" links the two infinitive phrases "to
go to medical school" and "to go to law school."
The explosion destroyed not only the school but also the neighbouring pub.
In this example the correlative conjunction "not only ... but also" links the two noun
phrases ("the school" and "neighbouring pub") which act as direct objects.